# Abstract

<!--*(183 words now, could be up to 300 words in Conservation Biology)*-->

In the next 100 years, we face unprecedented losses of biodiversity, rapid rates of climatic change, and uncertainty about the ecological response to these conditions. Combined, these issues call for ways to effectively communicate the issues and solutions, measure the benefits of biodiversity and compare systems, and robustly prioritize conservation. Recent work has proposed the ecological portfolio concept as one important solution. Here, we review this work and show how ecological portfolios have been used as *metaphors* for the benefit of biological diversity, *metrics* to compare the benefits of diversification across systems and through time, and *management tools* to make optimal conservation decisions in the face of environmental uncertainty. We then link ecological portfolios with existing ecological theory and demonstrate that the portfolio concept can unite many aspects of existing theory. We highlight challenges posed by both imprecision in the metaphor and fundamental differences between financial and ecological data. Finally, we emphasize the tremendous opportunity to apply portfolio optimization to conservation planning and introduce how financial risk metrics could benefit conservation biology. We conclude by outlining key questions for ecological portfolio theory to address.

<!--TODO: Nick: If you were to add 120 words, then focus on describing the headline results, e.g. (1) there are profound differences between financial and ecological data causing the metaphor to breakdown, and (2) we need to focus on measuring downsides (rather than symmetric risk).
plus a of a third one -->

<!--# Notes-->
<!--## @hummel2009-->
<!--- earlier ecological portfolio treatments have ignored (?) that there is nearly always some level of undiversifiable risk (they cite Sharpe 1964 for this)-->
<!--- suggest we would need to agree on level of risk aversion, and deal with "probability distributions of high-impact events" (Taleb)-->
<!--- insurance is a poor term for biodiversity conservation - diversification better-->

<!--## @mccluney2014-->
<!--- heterogeneity in habitat and connectivity levels, possibly due to or altered by human activities, are important in generating portfolio effects in riverine macroecosystems-->
<!--- intermediate connectivity probably important - too little and no recovery effect, too much and synchrony happens-->

<!-- [@moloney2011] -->

<!--Cons Biol citations-->
<!--Mawdsley, J. R., R. O’Malley, and D. S. Ojima. 2009. A review of climate- change adaptation strategies for wildlife management and biodiver- sity conservation. Conservation Biology 23:1080–1089. -->

<!--William, P., L. Hannah, S. Anderlman, G. Midgley, M. Arau ́jo, G. Gughes, L. Manne, E. Martineq-Meyer, and R. Pearson. 2005. Planning for cli- mate change: identifying minimum-dispersal corridors for the Cape Proteaceae. Conservation Biology 19:1063–1074. -->

<!--TODO cite and read "Conserving biodiversity using risk management: hoax or hope?" Hummel et al. 2009.-->

# Introduction

In the coming century we face a loss of biodiversity on the order of 100--10,000 times greater than average rates in the fossil record [@mea2005] --- a rate as fast if not faster than any of the five past mass extinctions [@barnosky2011]. Compounding this problem for conservation managers is uncertainty in future climate conditions [@heller2009] and the unknown responses of species and communities to those conditions [@lavergne2010]. Therefore, urgent questions are: Exactly how big a problem is the loss of biodiversity for the stability of ecological systems? How can conservation biologists communicate the insurance benefit of biodiversity to the public and policy makers? And, how can we apply limited conservation funds to manage biodiversity and limit risk in the face of increasing environmental uncertainty?

Nearly a decade ago, @figge2004 and @koellner2006 laid the foundation for why financial portfolio theory is ideally suited for answering these questions. Financial portfolio theory seems applicable to ecological systems for at least four reasons. (1) Ecological and financial systems are both structured hierarchically. Groups of populations form metapopulations and groups of species form communities; groups of financial assets form investment funds, which in turn form portfolios. (2) Ecological and financial managers have similar goals. Conservation managers maximize productivity and minimize the probability of ecological collapse; financial portfolio managers maximize expected financial returns and minimize the probability of large economic losses [@may2008]. (3) Substantial resources have gone into developing mathematical theory for optimizing financial investments. There is therefore a rich body of theory and experience to draw from. (4) The portfolio metaphor is an engaging and accessible way for ecologists and conservationists to think about ecological variance and biological diversity and convey the importance of this (often abstract) literature.

A number of recent studies have used financial portfolios as a metaphor, metric, or management approach to estimate and communicate the stabilizing benefit of diversity and prioritize its conservation [e.g. @schindler2010; @ando2011; @halpern2011; @hoekstra2012; @anderson2013; @mellin2014]. For example, @moore2010 used the portfolio metaphor to show how increased synchrony of salmon populations could lead to heightened extinction risk. @thibaut2012 used the portfolio-effect metric to quantify the insurance benefit of diversity for reef fish communities. @ando2012 used portfolio optimization to prioritize habitat for conservation that would create wetlands most robust to climate-change uncertainty. Portfolio theory promises to move conservation biology beyond the familiar concepts of the quantity, variety, and distribution of species [@mace2005] and into a new dimension that emphasizes elements of variance, covariance, stability, and synchrony [@loreau2010a].

But in applying financial theory to conservation biology, where does the portfolio metaphor break down? What exactly are the assets, portfolios, and investors in the financial metaphor? Further, in a changing world how might one invest in different kinds of ecological portfolios? Is the metaphor precise enough to generate ecological portfolio indices and use portfolio theory to actively manage or conserve ecological systems? And how might the differences between financial and ecological data affect our ability to apply financial portfolio theory to conservation biology? Are ecological portfolios just another name for existing ecological theory? Or, can ecological portfolios act as a unifying lens through which we view a wide variety of ecological theory?

Here, we address these questions by reviewing the rapidly emerging literature on ecological portfolios. The purpose of our review is fourfold: (1) Review the three recent contrasting applications of ecological portfolios as metaphors, metrics, and management tools (Fig. \ref{fig:traits}). (2) Illustrate how ecological portfolios can act as a unifying lens though which we can view a wide variety of modern ecological theory. (3) Highlight the imprecision of the metaphor given how we invest in financial and ecological portfolios and how data from the two fields differ. (4) Emphasize the utility of portfolio optimization for conservation prioritization.

# Ecological portfolios as a metaphor

Metaphors can powerfully shape how we perceive scientific ideas [@brown2003] and are particularly useful in developing and communicating the field of conservation biology [@larson2011]. In conservation biology, the portfolio concept has long been used as a metaphor to emphasize the need to not put all your eggs in one basket. This metaphor has come into particular prominence in the last 5--10 years. For example, the IUCN Criterion B2a recognizes the risks associated with a species existing in a single location [@iucn2001]. As another example, ecologists have suggested the need for a portfolio of possible solutions or approaches as a bet hedging strategy [e.g. @ehrlich2008]. Ecologists have also used the metaphor to loosely refer to diverse ecosystems and communities as portfolios of species [@figge2004]. These applications are an appealing way to convey concepts of diversification, uncertainty, and risk using familiar terminology. On the surface the metaphor seems intuitive; however, recent studies have pressed the metaphor further as both a metric and management tool [e.g. @moore2010; @schindler2010; @halpern2011; @ando2012] and the question remains how far we can take the metaphor before it breaks down [@anderson2013].

# The portfolio-effect metric

Beyond the metaphor, the portfolio-effect metric asks what the precise benefit is of a unit increase in biodiversity. The portfolio effect is derived from the economic question: How much better off are you by investing your money in a diversified portfolio instead of investing all your money in a single asset [@markowitz1952]? In conservation biology, we consider the current ecological system the diversified portfolio and a theoretical homogeneous (or monoculture) system the single asset [@anderson2013]. For example, we could ask how much more stable is a metapopulation of salmon from different streams, rivers, or watersheds (the portfolio) compared to a theoretical homogeneous stream population (the single asset) [@schindler2010; @carlson2011]. Hence, to accurately measure a portfolio effect we need to predict the variability of a theoretical homogeneous system --- a system that lacks the element of biodiversity we are interested in. Unfortunately, although the portfolio metaphor provides a new lens through which to view the diversity-stability relationship, on its own it remains unclear whether it provides new insights about the nature of the relationship itself.

Nonetheless, by providing a new lens, the portfolio effect as a metric has created an impetus for new theoretical and empirical insights into stability-diversity relationships. Early work focused on theoretical aspects of the portfolio effect for greatly simplified systems --- identifying when we would expect a stabilizing portfolio effect and what factors would enhance it [@doak1998; @tilman1998; @lehman2000]. Over time theoretical studies developed indices that relaxed assumptions about the systems they describe [e.g. @loreau2010a; @thibaut2013]. Furthermore, integrating numerous theories from the last decade, @thibaut2013 reduced the portfolio effect to a weighted-average effect of variability and a synchrony effect. A recent trend has been to apply these indices to empirical data, albeit primarily to salmon [@greene2010; @schindler2010; @carlson2011; @anderson2013; @mellin2014]. However, empirical work has concentrated on applying relatively simple portfolio-effect metrics that make strong assumptions that are rarely met in empirical systems [@thibaut2013; @anderson2013]. Violation of these assumptions can strongly distort our perception of the portfolio effect and hence the perceived benefit of diversity to ecological stability [@anderson2013].

# Ecological portfolio management

In addition to measuring the portfolio-effect metric, we can use financial portfolio theory to inform decisions about conservation management. Markowitz's seminal contribution to financial portfolio theory was a focus on portfolio selection --- the idea that out of all possible portfolios there exists a subset that optimize a risk-return trade-off [@markowitz1952] (Fig. \ref{fig:mpt}). In conservation biology, the goals of conservation practitioners often parallel those of financial managers, even though they are rarely expressed as such [@figge2004]. We see ecological portfolio management happening in one of three ways: (1) considering and promoting existing management structures that promote diversified portfolios, (2) using Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) to optimize ecological resource extraction, or (3) using MPT to optimize an ecological system itself.

First, we can consider existing management structures that create systems analogous to diversified portfolios. For example, fishers can engage in catch-pooling cooperatives where fishers share the profits from their catches according to predefined rules. @sethi2012 showed that this portfolio-like scheme reduces risk for red king crab fishers in the Bering Sea by up to 40%. Other fisheries management tools, such as community-based management, individual transferable quotas (ITQs), and licensing systems that allow for fishing a diversity of species, can create diversified catch portfolios for fishers and buffer fishers against the risk of poor profits [@hilborn2001; @kasperski2013]. Alternatively, we can consider the properties of a diversified portfolio, such as representation, resilience, and redundancy, and look for management strategies that promote these properties in ecological systems [@haak2012]

Second, we can use MPT directly to optimally allocate harvesting efforts. This suggestion is not new --- some of the earliest references to ecological portfolios suggest portfolio theory as a management tool [@baldursson1997; @costanza2000] but few studies have explored the idea to its full extent and interest in the topic has expanded strongly in recent years [e.g. @edwards2004; @sanchirico2008; @halpern2011; @moloney2011]. In conservation biology, portfolio optimization can be applied spatially. For example, @halpern2011 used MPT to maximize fishing profits while minimizing spatial unevenness. MPT has also been used to optimize decisions about whether to clearcut or retain standing trees [@hyytiainen2008; @hildebrandt2011]. As a third example, @moloney2011 used MPT to optimize the choice of grazing animals on Australia's rangelands. With few exceptions, however, the application of MPT for harvesting decisions has been limited to fishery and forestry examples.

Third, we can use ecological portfolio management to choose how we allocate conservation efforts to manage risk for an ecological system as a whole. For example, portfolio optimization can be used to spatially allocate conservation activity for wetlands to maximize ecosystem services while minimizing uncertainty due to climate change [@ando2011; @ando2012]. In forestry, MPT has been used to select the optimal weighting of seed sources for regenerating forests under a variety of climate change scenarios [@crowe2008]. We see this as a promising but largely unexplored use of the ecological portfolio concept, and we revisit this topic in the *Opportunities* section of this paper.

# Ecological theory to draw from

Portfolio theory represents both a new lens through which to view existing ecological theories and the glue that can hold many together (Table \ref{tab:theory}). For example, community ecology, the theory of island biogeography, metapopulation dynamics, and functional-group ecology can all generate portfolio-like ecological structure. 
Importantly, the portfolios produced by these scenarios have specific features, which affect portfolio dynamics.
For example, in community portfolios, predator assets can eat prey assets, which has no direct equivalent in financial portfolios.
In metapopulation portfolios, subpopulation assets can exchange individuals between each other and rescue subpopulation assets at low abundance or value.

Other ecological theories can inform expected patterns of diversification and portfolio dynamics (Table \ref{tab:theory}).
For example, the Moran effect suggests that ecological assets that are further apart from each other are more likely to experience diverse environments and therefore provide greater portfolio diversification.
The unified neutral theory of biodiversity and biogeography asks what we would observe if species were functionally equivalent. We can think of this neutral community as an undiversified portfolio and compare it to observed communities to examine the benefit of functional diversity.
This comparison is analogous to the portfolio-effect metric in recent literature [@doak2008; @schindler2010; @anderson2013].

Finally, a variety of mechanisms can generate ecological portfolio diversification (Table \ref{tab:theory}).
For instance, intraspecific trait variation, response diversity, and even personality variation can be thought of as sources of portfolio diversification. 
Ecological portfolios therefore can have multiple levels of diversification, just as financial portfolios can be diversified across multiple levels such as investment types, geography, business sectors, and companies.
Ecological-portfolio research can focus on one or multiple levels of diversification.
Whereas research on many of these ecological disciplines typically exists in its own niche, ecological portfolio theory encourages us to consider many elements in conjunction.

# Challenges of applying the metaphor

## Precision of the metaphor

The definition of an asset in ecological portfolios has been broad. Recent work has, for example, considered protected areas [@ando2012], salmon abundance [@greene2010; @moore2010; @schindler2010; @carlson2011; @yeakel2014], moth abundance [@anderson2013], reef fish abundance [@anderson2013; @mellin2014], and shark habitat [@yates2012] as assets in ecological portfolios. But we have only begun to see the types of ecological assets that can be considered. We suggest the question shouldn't be whether some ecological unit matches a specific definition of an asset but rather if considering that unit in an asset-portfolio context is useful. Importantly, how we invest in an ecological asset affects its interpretation in a portfolio context. Below we outline two investment styles that we refer to as *partial-* and *whole-asset* investment (Fig. \ref{fig:salmonport}).

Partial-asset investments are akin to the traditional concept of a financial portfolio (Fig. \ref{fig:salmonport}a). In finance, an investor has a fixed quantity of money to invest and the investor uses that money to buy portions of financial assets. The majority of financial portfolio theory has been developed around this investment model. An ecological example would be a fisher allocating harvesting resources into fishing a suite of species [@baldursson1997; @edwards2004; @kasperski2013]. Alternatively, a grizzly bear might consume fish from a number of streams (Fig. \ref{fig:salmonport}a). In both the financial and ecological context, partial-asset investment allows the investor to alter his or her investment with relative ease. Both the fisher and grizzly bear can usually choose to allocate their efforts across different species or different streams.

Whole-asset investments are less common in finance but abundant in conservation biology (Fig. \ref{fig:salmonport}b). In whole-asset investment, the investor chooses to invest his or her resources in the entirety of an asset. For example, a financial investor might purchase a suite of small businesses. In conservation biology, a manager might manage a suite (catchment) of salmon populations [@schindler2010]. At the same time, a conservation agency might campaign for a certain allocation of conservation efforts toward that catchment. (Fig. \ref{fig:salmonport}b). In these whole-asset examples, if the investor wishes to redistribute investment, the investor must change the size of the assets themselves (e.g. by changing the habitat available for each salmon population). Furthermore, different investors invested in the same ecological assets may have disparate goals but the assets must be the same size in each investor's portfolio. For example, the fisheries management and conservation agencies might disagree on salmon return targets for a portfolio of salmon stocks, but ultimately must come to a consensus if their portfolios share stocks.

Why distinguish partial- and whole-asset investments in ecological portfolios? The investment style affects: (1) How easy it is for an investor to increase investment in one asset and decrease investment in another. (2) The implications of the investor choosing to stop investing in an asset. (3) How changing investment in an asset affects the risk and return properties of the portfolio. (4) How conflicting interests of investors propagate through the ecological portfolio. All these issues point to the challenges of applying financial portfolio theory, which is mostly concerned with partial-asset investment, to ecological portfolios, which are frequently whole-asset investment portfolios.

## Attributes of financial and ecological data

Ecological and financial data differ in many fundamental ways that will affect how financial portfolio theory can be applied to ecological systems (Table \ref{tab:data}). For example, ecological data are often of short duration, recorded at low frequency (e.g. each year), and often contain missing values. Financial data, on the other hand, can be recorded by the minute for decades and rarely contain missing values. Econometric techniques built to manage high-frequency irregularly-spaced financial data [e.g. @hautsch2012] may not apply to much of today's ecological data. However, these techniques may become increasingly useful as similar types of ecological data become more common (e.g. TODO TOPP, OTN, other tagging)? Another difference between financial and ecological data, is that ecological data often include considerable measurement error that adds uncertainty around the true value of ecological assets. Financial stock returns, however, reflect the trading value of a stock by definition. Therefore, to accurately apply financial portfolio optimization to ecological portfolios, we may need to adopt methods that can incorporate measurement error. Solutions may include Bayesian modelling, Monte Carlo simulation, and state space models [@morgan1990].

# Opportunities

## Ecological portfolio optimization

A central focus of financial portfolio theory is selecting an optimal weighting of assets to maximize return for a given level of risk or minimize risk for a given level of return [@markowitz1952]. In this paper, we have discussed optimizing ecological resource use to improve the income of ecological resource harvesters. However, we have mentioned only two examples of portfolio optimization that benefit a purely conservation outcome [@crowe2008; @ando2012]. We suggest taking the ecological portfolio management concept to its logical extension: consider optimizing portfolios of ecological assets with the goal of maximizing ecological productivity while minimizing the risk of low productivity.

Any ecological scenario that produces time series analogous to typical financial stock time series may be a candidate for ecological conservation portfolio optimization. Population growth rate within a metapopulation context is one possibility and will generally represent a stationary time series in the same way that the first difference of returns are frequently used in financial portfolio analysis (Fig. \ref{fig:risk}). The central issue with applying conservation-oriented ecological portfolio optimization will be deciding what precisely constitutes "investment" and how that investment re-allocation will occur. For example, if the abundance of fish stocks is considered investment how does one increase or decrease that investment through time (Fig. \ref{fig:salmonport})? Perhaps these adjustments could be made through changes in harvesting limits, stock supplementation, or habitat restoration. Realistic re-investment strategies may be taxa, region, or case-specific, and are thus far mostly unexplored.

## Ecological risk metrics

Conservation biology has typically used metrics of symmetric variability such as the standard deviation or the coefficient of variation of a time series [e.g. @greene2010] and sometimes loosely referred to the result as risk; but, risk specifically refers to both the probability of an undesired event happening and the magnitude of loss associated with that event [@morgan1990 Fig. \ref{fig:risk}]. For example, if a precise outcome is unknown or variable but can only end positively, it presents little risk. Therefore, ecological risk metrics should allow for an asymmetry in this loss function [@reckhow1994]. Furthermore, recent work in ecology has noted the frequency and influence of "ecological surprises" [@lindenmayer2010; @doak2008] and counterintuitive responses of populations to management [@pine-iii2009]. Therefore, like financial risk metrics, ecological risk metrics should allow for long-tailed probability distributions [@hummel2009]. The financial literature is rich with methods to rapidly assess the risk properties of time series --- methods that are particularly useful when used as part of portfolio optimization [@rachev2008].

Recent financial literature has focused on downside risk metrics [@ang2006], which emphasize the probability of an undesired event; we see great opportunity for their application in conservation biology (Fig. \ref{fig:risk}). A variety of downside risk metrics measure different properties of risk. Therefore, how do different metrics reflect the goals of different "investors" in ecological portfolios? Conservation organizations, for example, may be concerned with avoiding catastrophic single years that could influence future productivity or have down-stream effects on predators or prey. They might use the probability of ruin, which measures the probability of an event worse than some threshold occurring [@vasicek1987] or the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) to characterize the average magnitude of an extremely bad event [@rockafellar2002; @sethi2012a; @sethi2012b]. Resource users, on the other hand, might wish to minimize year-to-year fluctuations to ensure a stable income. Their interests could be reflected in the semideviation or semivariance, which characterizes the typical badness of an event [@markowitz1959; @sethi2012a; @sethi2012b]. Moving forward, a fruitful area of research may be matching risk metrics to specific conservation-management goals [@sethi2012a].

# Outlook

Ecological portfolio theory is still a young discipline and there exist many important future questions to address: For example:

1.  Across taxa, geography, and time, how pervasive is the stabilizing ecological portfolio effect and what factors affect its strength? Recent work suggests the effect may vary greatly across systems, but the general pervasiveness and the factors that promote it remain largely unclear [@anderson2013; @mellin2014].

2.  How can the portfolio effect and portfolio optimization inform management and conservation and in what other contexts can it be applied? For instance, how might portfolio optimization inform the debate about the advantages of forming single large or several small reserves (SLOSS)? As another example, what can portfolio optimization tell us about managing the recovery of impacted ecological systems?

3.  How can we integrate established principles of conservation management with portfolio theory? Furthermore, what elements of portfolio theory can we integrate with traditional principles of ecological management?

4.  How can we move ecological portfolio theory beyond an academic exercise to using its principles in applied management? Recent work has shown clear theoretical advantages to ecological conservation that considers MPT [@crowe2008; @ando2012], but, to our knowledge, MPT has yet to be integrated into real-word conservation planning.

In conclusion, we emphasize the importance of thinking about ecological portfolios from all dimensions --- as metaphors, metrics, and management tools. In particular, management, or specifically the application of ecological portfolio concepts to decision making, represents an exciting area of research that conservation biology has just begun exploring. Ecological portfolios can apply to a wide variety of ecological assets, ecological investors, and investment styles, but we need to carefully consider both imprecision in the metaphor and how fundamental differences between financial and ecological data may restrict the financial portfolio methods we can apply in conservation biology. 
Ecological portfolio theory's greatest strength may be that it unites a wide variety of ecological theories along with concepts of risk, uncertainty, and variability. 
Furthermore, it unites these sometimes-abstract concepts in a way that can be clearly communicated to conservation managers and the public.
Despite the many recent applications of the portfolio metaphor, the portfolio-effect metric, and ecological portfolio decision making, there exists much to discover.

# Acknowledgements

We thank T.A. Branch, J.W. Moore, and S.M. O'Regan for comments and discussions on earlier drafts. We thank M.P. Beakes for help developing the Fraser River map. Funding was provided by Simon Fraser University, NSERC (ABC, NKD, SCA), the Canada Research Chairs Program (NKD), Fulbright Canada (SCA), and a Garfield Weston Foundation/B.C. Packers Ltd. Graduate Fellowship in Marine Sciences (SCA).                                        

\bibliography{/Users/seananderson/Dropbox/tex/jlong,/Users/seananderson/Dropbox/tex/ref3}

\clearpage
\input{theory-table}
\clearpage
\input{data-table}
<!--\clearpage-->
<!--\input{risk-table}-->
\clearpage

**Figure 1**: Desirable traits of ecological metaphors, metrics, and management approaches (decision-making tools).

**Figure 2**: An introduction to Modern Portfolio Theory mean-variance optimization. In finance, portfolios are formed by choosing how much to invest in various assets. Modern Portfolio Theory focuses on identifying the set of portfolios that optimizes the trade-off between expected return ('mean') and expected risk ('variance'). (a) This set of portfolios is referred to as the efficient frontier. (b) The minimum variance portfolio achieves the lowest expected risk; the remaining risk is said to be undiversifiable. (c) A risker, but still efficient portfolio. (d) An example inefficient portfolio, which has a lower expected return than (c) and greater expected risk than (b). Adapted from @hoekstra2012.

**Figure 3**: There are multiple ways of investing in ecological portfolios. In this example, investors are shown along the top and bottom and ecological assets are shown in the middle (populations of chum salmon, *Oncorhynchus keta*, and Chinook salmon, *Oncorhynchus tshawytscha*). The shaded arcs indicate investment. (a) Partial-asset investors invest by removing portions of the salmon populations --- the salmon that commercial fisher 1 removes are unavailable for the grizzly bear. These investors can often change their investment with ease. For example, commercial fisher 2 could decide to fish more Chinook and less chum salmon. Most financial portfolio theory is developed around this paradigm. (b) Whole-asset investors invest in entire populations. These investors can share assets but may have different goals for their portfolio. They can adjust their investment by managing properties of the population itself. For example, the fisheries management agency could reduce fishing of chum salmon to allow the population to grow. The conservation agency could fund habitat restoration for Chinook salmon to increase carrying capacity and expand their investment.

**Figure 4**: Symmetric variability vs. downside risk metrics. (a--c) An illustration of three theoretical systems with the same symmetric variability but different levels of downside risk. The y-axis denotes rate of change of abundance or biomass (``returns'' in financial terminology). The dashed lines represent the mean ($\mu$) and the surrounding shaded regions represent $\pm$ one standard deviation ($\sigma$) --- a measure that does not account for the asymmetric property of risk. The solid lines represent the 95\% CVaR (conditional value at risk) and the surrounding shaded regions represent the regions below the 95\% VaR (value at risk). CVaR and VaR are both downside risk metrics that can accurately identify higher-risk systems. (d, e) Symmetric and downside risk metrics applied to annual returns of sockeye salmon stocks in the Fraser River ([data from @dorner2008]). Metric values are scaled to a maximum of 1.0 across stocks and stocks are ordered by increasing CVaR. Symmetric variability (CV; CV = $\sigma / \mu$) and asymmetric risk metrics (all others) differ considerably in their rank order of risk for the stocks.

\clearpage

\input{figs}

